This is the second of a two-part response
specifically for folks who approach me
with promises of their god’s love, setting out
my reasons for rejecting this apparent gift
and explaining why all of us deserve better.
In part one, I looked at how
the major world religions encourage us
to view completely arbitrary life events and
physical sensations as evidence of divine love.
And I highlighted some of the problems
this false love generates.
I also looked at the parasitic nature of god
characters such as Yahweh and Allah
who're presented as loving parents, but who in fact
give absolutely no love to their supposed children
and instead constantly demand it.
In part two, I want to expose more of the layers of depravity underpinning this parody of love.
The major world religions are deeply
invested in the notion of free will.
If we determine our own beliefs and actions,
we can reasonably be held accountable for them.
On the platform of accountability,
religions plant their concepts of sin and virtue
blaming us for the former and praising us for the latter.
And on this stack of building blocks rest
the ultimate concepts of hell and heaven.
Mess around with the notion of free will
and accusations of heresy soon start to fly.
Within Christianity, emerging in the mid-1600s,
the Jansenists held that humans
were powerless to avoid sinning
because, following Adam and Eve’s fall
from paradise, humans were deprived of grace.
They further argued that any humans who were subsequently offered Yahweh’s grace
were powerless to resist it.
This meant humans that humans
couldn't be held accountable
either for their sinful nature or their redemption.
The Jansenists’ ideas soon aroused
papal condemnation for heresy.
Within Islam, two groups emerged during the
Umayyad period, between the 7th and 8th centuries,
that were both denounced because of their
contentious views on free will.
The school of Jabariyyah viewed humans as
divine puppets whose actions were determined
by the Islamic god Allah and who
consequently bore no responsibility.
To back up their assertion, they
cited surah 76 verse 30 of the Qur’an
which states that Allah’s will dictates human will.
In contrast, the school of Qadariyyah
proposed that humans possessed a free will
completely independent of the will of Allah,
making humans a rival to Allah.
Senior lecturer in Islamic studies
Abdur Rashid Bhat writes that ....
‘Both these groups were disapproved of
by the Muslim community
for their rigid, extremist and heretical stands.’
All this bitter religious dispute to preserve
our freedom to determine our own life’s course.
And what do the gods expect us to do
with this generous gift of freedom?
Submit ourselves into slavery.
Islam is pretty upfront about its desire to enslave.
The word ‘Islam’ itself means submission
—specifically submission to the will of Allah.
Read scriptural and scholarly Islamic writings
—or simply talk to a range of Muslims —
and you’ll find the word ‘human’ openly
and unapologetically replaced
by the words ‘servant’ and ‘slave’.
You’ll find similar language in the Bible.
So — the gods gave us free will
so that we could choose to be slaves.
Anyone spot the fundamental problem with this deal?
And there’s no room for
half-hearted or grudging submission.
You have to really want to
put on those mental shackles —
to forgo your critical thinking
in order to defend the master’s stories;
to limit your human relationships
in order to defend the master’s supremacy;
to abandon your logical faculties
in order to defend the master’s inconsistencies;
to waive your moral reasoning
in order to defend the master’s immorality;
in short, to surrender your humanity
in order to defend your master’s inhumanity.
And if your hunger for this
degradation isn’t strong enough?
You’ll be condemned to everlasting suffering in hell.
So, Yahweh and Allah —supposedly
the most loving beings to exist —
created us for slavery or torture.
Even the Bible states that love and fear don’t mix.
1 John 4:18 asserts ‘There is no fear in love.
But perfect love drives out fear,
because fear has to do with punishment.’
Unfortunately, Yahweh seems
determined to have it both ways.
In Matthew 22, Jesus states the greatest commandment
is to love Yahweh with all our heart and soul and mind.
But in books such as Deuteronomy,
humans are repeatedly commanded to fear Yahweh.
So we have an impossible triangle.
Humans are first commanded to love Yahweh;
second, commanded to fear Yahweh;
and third, told that love and fear don’t mix.
These contradictory angles add up to one big mess.
Turning to Islam, threats
of hellish punishment for non-belief
contravene surah 2, verse 256 of the Qur’an,
which forbids compulsion in religion.
What greater form of compulsion is there than
the threat of eternal torture?
Of course, with Islam,
threats aren’t confined to the afterlife.
It’s a modern-day disgrace
that over 20 territories on this planet
have official laws and policies
prohibiting deconversion from Islam.
Apostates are threatened variously
with fines, loss of citizenship or execution.
Several ex-Muslims living in these territories
have shared their personal stories with me,
describing the exhausting,
corrosive psychological pressures
they’re forced to endure on a daily basis just to survive.
So much for no compulsion.
Of course, compulsion in religion isn’t just a problem
because some passage in the Qur’an forbids it.
Compulsion backfires on Islam — and Christianity —
by destroying their very foundation: free will.
The types of free will typically asserted by religions
are already difficult enough
to support on philosophical grounds
as our increasing understanding of the human brain
exposes increasing complexities and obstacles regarding the concept of choice.
But the use of compulsion in religion,
forcing humans into submission,
destroys any claim of divinely granted free will.
This has a devastating knock-on effect
destroying accountability, virtue and ultimately
any justification for heavenly rewards.
With their threats of eternal suffering
the gods huff and puff and blow their own house down.
Divine attacks on free will can be found in
other parts of the Qur’an and Bible.
In the Qur’an surah 2, verse 7, Allah is said to have
fixed a seal on the hearts and hearing of disbelievers
and veiled their vision.
So disbelievers are divinely
prevented from becoming believers
and then punished for not believing.
In the Bible, we find a similarly perverse
attack on free will in the book of Exodus.
In chapter 3, verses 7 and 8, Yahweh tells Moses
he’s seen the oppression of the children of Israel
and promises to deliver them
from their Egyptian masters.
In verses 19 and 20, Yahweh says he’s sure
the Egyptian Pharaoh will not liberate the Israelites.
So Yahweh vows to strike Egypt with wonders,
after which he predicts the Pharaoh will let them go.
But in Exodus 4, we find a bizarre plot twist.
Yahweh tells Moses that he’s going
to harden the Pharaoh’s heart,
forcing the Pharaoh not to liberate the Israelites.
So Yahweh promises to liberate the Israelites
then deliberately prevents their liberation
by taking away the Pharaoh’s free will.
We now see why in Exodus 3 Yahweh was so sure
that the Pharaoh wouldn’t let the Israelites go.
What this self-defeating divine intervention
means is that Yahweh’s strike against Egypt,
supposedly in response to the Pharaoh’s refusal,
is in fact a response to Yahweh’s own actions.
Given the choice, would you freely choose to be a slave?
Not only do Allah and Yahweh
want us to submit to slavery
they threaten us to submit with
promises of unimaginable punishment,
and when it suits them,
they’re even prepared to force submission
by removing our free will altogether
— as Yahweh did with the Pharaoh
and then punish us for the consequences.
This conflicted divine behaviour
demonstrates many character traits.
Narcissism. Hypocrisy. Sadism.
Conspicuously absent is love.
Stretching back thousands of years
the practice of blood sacrifice to the gods
persists to this day on a huge scale.
The rationale for these sacrifices varies.
The world’s largest mass animal sacrifice
is performed by Muslims as part of Hajj
a vast annual pilgrimage to Mecca in which hundreds of thousands of animals
— including sheep, goats and cows — are slaughtered
‘in the hope of attaining closeness to Allah’, showing that ‘they are willing to give up some of their own benefits’.
Within Hinduism, the Gadhimai festival has seen millions of devotees descend on Nepal every five years
for the world’s second largest animal sacrifice
in which — among other animals —
thousands of cattle are beheaded.
Attendants hope that this torrent
of blood will make their wishes come true.
Aside from the granting of wishes,
and displays of self-denial,
another religious rationale for sacrifice
is substitutionary atonement.
Here, people hope to erase their sins
by casting them onto a sacrificial subject
who’s punished in their place.
An example of scapegoat sacrifice forms the
basis of Christianity.
This sacrifice is cited as a demonstration of Yahweh’s profound love. But it demonstrates no such thing.
Some folks are surprised to learn that the
life of the Biblical messiah Jesus
not only ends but begins with blood sacrifice.
When he’s born, his parents sacrifice two birds
in keeping with a divine law set out in Leviticus 12.
Not the stuff of school nativities. But it sets
an appropriately bloody tone for what's to come.
Calling himself the son of Yahweh, Jesus infuriates the Jewish authorities.
He’s arrested and tried by the Sanhedrin
— a Jewish judicial assembly
and condemned to death by crucifixion.
Although he foresees all of these events
long in advance, he allows them to happen
because, through his death, he’s destined
to pay a ransom for humankind.
Since the fall from paradise, after the first humans
— Adam and Eve — disobeyed Yahweh
by eating from the forbidden tree
of the knowledge of good and evil
every human subsequently born was born wrong;
born as an imperfect sinner.
The sins of every sinner had to be
paid for to avoid damnation
and for many years, animal sacrifices
were offered as payment.
But then Jesus arrives and offers a deal.
If we ask for his forgiveness, he’ll pay
with his blood, absolving us of our sins.
Jesus’s blood is far more precious than
animal or human blood. It has infinite value.
So it can absolve infinite sin.
As a very young child I didn’t
understand this blood magic stuff
but I found the crucifixion story very distressing.
As I grew up and my involvement
in Christianity deepened
I’d meditate repeatedly on Jesus’s sacrifice.
Time after time, l’d imagine him dying in
agony to pay for my sins
and I’d cycle through the same overwhelming feelings.
Sorrow, contrition, reverence,
incomprehension, powerlessness, thankfulness.
It was an emotional mouse wheel
that flung rationality away with centrifugal force.
But in my early teens, in a crisis of faith
I stepped off that mouse wheel for a moment
and examined this bloody drama with cold eyes.
And I realised this drama was a farce.
Why should we be blamed for being born sinners?
Why should we pay for some deficiency over
which we had absolutely no control?
The fact was, in Biblical terms, the blood-hungry
Yahweh was entirely to blame for our sinful nature.
When he created Adam, he created him from dust;
from earth. So Adam inherited no human sin.
If Yahweh created every human this way
then no human would be an inherent sinner.
But instead, quite bizarrely, having created Adam from
earth, Yahweh now switches to creation from birth
a completely different method which he knows
will guarantee that every human is an inherent sinner.
By commanding Adam and Eve to go forth and multiply,
Yahweh deliberately multiplies human sin,
multiplies human debt, and multiplies
the need for blood sacrifice.
We have names for people who
deliberately peddle inferior products
that demand constant, expensive maintenance work.
‘Supreme intelligence’ isn’t one of them.
John 3:16 tells us that Yahweh loved the world
so much that he sacrificed his one and only son.
Far from showing love, Jesus’s death
is just the melodramatic hook
to one of the biggest religious scams in history
designed to arouse a combination
of profound guilt and gratitude,
when we have absolutely no reason
to feel either of these.
Not only is this blood-magic completely unnecessary,
it makes a mockery of personal responsibility.
If people do me wrong, but then apologise and
make personal restoration, and I forgive them
the matter should be considered resolved.
Not so, according to Yahweh.
In fact, these wrongdoers could compensate me
a hundred times over; a thousand times over.
Makes no odds.
If they decline to participate in Yahweh’s blood magic
by submitting to Jesus, they’ll be condemned.
Conversely, If people do me wrong,
but offer me no apology or restoration
and receive no forgiveness from me,
the matter should be considered unresolved.
Again, not so.
If they use Yahweh’s blood magic, then they’re absolved.
I have decades of experience of countless
Christians from various denominations
who’ve treated people appallingly — repeatedly stirring conflict, lying, bullying, falsely maligning others.
And never making amends for their misdeeds.
And yet they go to church each week, recite the Lord’s prayer — maybe confess their sins to a priest
and they’re assured that they’re forgiven.
Substitutionary atonement destroys personal
accountability.
The wrongs we do each other
are not magically wiped away
by grovelling to the ghost of some Jew
executed thousands of years ago.
The wrongs we do each other
are resolved through human efforts
with remorse, integrity, patience, empathy.
It can be a messy, uncertain, demanding process.
But, unlike scapegoat sacrifice, it’s an honest one.
And it gives us back what religions
like Christianity try to take from us —
the adult autonomy to sort out
our own problems and move on from them
— instead of submitting to a divine protection racket
in which we endlessly pay Yahweh
in blood to protect us from Yahweh.
Religions like Christianity are divisive to the core.
Even if there was only one denomination of Christianity
which everyone followed faithfully,
the religion itself would still work to come
between its followers at all times.
In the first of these two videos
I looked at Jesus’s demand that
we all love him more than anyone else.
Nothing gentle, meek or mild about that.
And not content with this already overinflated demand
in Luke 14, verse 26, Jesus really
lays bare the reach of his narcissism.
He demands so much love that — by contrast —
our love for everyone else should feel like hate.
Unfortunately, some Christians are willing to
downgrade their loved ones much more than this.
Of the promises of divine love
made to me over the years
a significant percentage has come
from representatives of an organisation
that I regard as one of the least qualified
to talk about love: Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The concept of separation is deeply embedded in the psychology of the JW organisation
which claims that the world has been taken over by
Satan, and that all non-Witnesses are morally corrupt.
While you might find JWs interacting
with non-members on a superficial level,
including acts of kindness and charity,
their desire to remain ‘separate from the
world’ puts a strict limit on these interactions
and creates an ‘us vs them’ mentality
which allows no middle ground.
If individuals decide to leave the religion,
in line with the organisation’s policy
the entire JW community, including friends and family,
is compelled to dissociate itself from them
refusing even to acknowledge them with greetings.
The organisation justifies this social shunning
with Biblical passages
such as 2 John, Matthew 18 and Romans 16
each of which discourages contact
with those who don’t follow the party line.
JW literature presents shunning as ‘loving discipline’
designed to make individuals see the error
of their ways and return to the 'truth'.
But comments made by the organisation
in its Watchtower magazine
give a different rationale for shunning
asserting that, ‘apostates are ‘mentally diseased,’
and they seek to infect others
with their disloyal teachings.’
The fact is this shunning is nothing more
than a cruel abuse of social power.
Humans are social creatures. As such, we can be extremely vulnerable to social pressure.
The JW organisation exploits this
vulnerability to gain compliance.
Because they’re discouraged from forming
close friendships with non-members
shunned apostates are often stripped
of their entire social world.
Of course there might be an overwhelming
urge to return to the flock.
Not because the flock represents truth
but because of the pain of losing everything
and trying to surviving on their own.
Returning to compliance takes the pain away.
The isolationist mentality of this organisation shields its members from reality.
By remaining separate from the world
JWs don’t get to see the lives of the ordinary folks
their organisation routinely condemns.
Their fantasy of a world overrun
by Satan is never challenged.
Yes, the world has problems.
Yes, there are destructive agents operating in it.
But there are also deeply dedicated humanitarian
agents working to improve the world.
By extension, JWs never get to see of lives
of the family and friends they shun.
If they did, many of them would have
to face an uncomfortable truth —
that the loved one they’ve shunned is leading a life
that’s just as good and honest and loving as it ever was.
Let’s underscore this point.
Wanda is a Jehovah’s Witness. Lois isn’t.
For forty years, they lead virtually identical lives.
Both make exactly the same mistakes
and do their best to make up for them.
Both give exactly the same time and energy to charity.
Both give exactly the same love to their families.
The only difference is that, as a Jehovah’s Witness
Wanda asks Jesus to take responsibility for her wrongdoings with his blood
while Lois accepts responsibility for her own actions.
In what way would Wanda be corrupted
by associating with Lois?
Does Lois’s decision to take responsibility for her own actions make her more or less virtuous than Wanda
who wants someone else to pay for hers?
Now let’s imagine that the children of both
women reveal that they’ve become a buddhist.
Wanda shuns her child, who will now grow up to marry
and have children and grandchildren
who Wanda will never know.
Lois holds onto her child,
doesn’t become a buddhist
but does enjoy years of mutually
rewarding relationships with her son, his wife
their children and their grandchildren.
Bearing in mind the JWs’ complaint about
the destructive forces overrunning the world
which of these mothers has contributed more love to the world?
Religions that break up friends and families
have nothing to teach me about love.
In part one, I mentioned that when I reject their promise of divine love
some folks assert that I’ve been somehow ‘damaged’,
and express hopes that I might someday be ‘healed’.
If I was at all damaged then it was by
the warped, avaricious, sadistic pseudo-love
peddled by the religion into which I was indoctrinated.
If I had to heal from anything, it was this.
I had to unlearn the neurotic
thinking style instilled in me —
the habitual thoughts of unworthiness
the constant doubt about whether my love was ever good enough
the feeling that my life was not my own
the instinctive lack of confidence
in my own moral judgement.
It’s no coincidence that religions
that pontificate endlessly about love
constantly neglect one of its
most important forms: self love.
It’s the subject of corny songs
and cheesy internet memes.
But for me, self love really
forms the grounding of all love.
Self love isn’t about being proud or immodest.
It isn’t about deluding ourselves that we have some special importance.
It’s about being secure in our self-worth.
When we don’t have an abiding
internal sense of our own worth
we often end up seeking validation from external agents.
By giving them the power to control our sense of worth,
we become vulnerable to manipulation by those agents.
Religious agents in particular are all too happy
to prey in that vulnerability.
I was raised on a distorted parody of love.
I didn’t see it was distorted, because everything
else in my life was distorted around it
to make it look reasonable.
For years, I found ways of ignoring the telltale signs —
the subjugation, the suffering,
the needless overblown sacrifices
all of which were silently screaming at me:
‘You’re looking at this from the wrong angle’.
But eventually I listened.
The flip in perspective was disorientating.
But things finally made sense.
And I was able to shed years of
distorted thoughts and emotions.
I was finally able to solve previously insoluble problems thrown up by these loveless ideologies
like: ‘How do you find a moment’s happiness in heaven
when you’re conscious of loved ones burning in hell?’
The answer was simple: ‘You don’t.’
Many of us come from generations of folks
who’ve had this corrupt model of love drilled into them.
But things are changing.
And I know I’m not alone when I say:
I reject this degrading ‘love’.
[a succession of voices affirming:
I reject this degrading ‘love’.]